Hello.
Hi there shé:kon.
My name is Samantha White and I am from the Six Nations community.
I am a Mohawk Turtle Clan member.
I am a daughter, I'm a sister, I'm an auntie, and right now, I'm a public servant.
Something close and dear to me that I have been hearing a lot is I hear the same census data
that Indigenous youth will become the largest untapped human resource and labor force.
I get really protective of Indigenous youth when I hear this.
So my story is intertwined with the public service because I was afforded the opportunity to attend college and university.
I grew up mostly in the Six Nations and Hamilton area, so I was all around a lot of urban natives, as I say.
So I know so many people who can do as I have done but haven't had the same opportunity, and that's not fair.
So a large part of my adult life now works to address that inequity for my own people back home.
If I can lead by example, that's my first step.
The second is preparing the system for our people, for our Indigenous youth.
And again, this is where my protectiveness comes out.
So my path was headed towards the not for profit sector,
and it wasn't until I was actually rejected from the original program choice at the University of Ottawa
that I accepted their alternative option for me...But it turns out I absolutely loved the program.
I can't say enough about my experience at the University of Ottawa and especially the Indigenous Resource Center.
I lived there, so it's through safe spaces like the Indigenous Resource Center
that I was able to attend a targeted recruitment initiative for Indigenous students.
Now this initiative, it's called the Indigenous Student Employment Opportunity, which is still open now.
So, if you're an Indigenous student, please, I encourage you to apply.
They're not paying me, I swear.
So I entered the public service as a student in 2018 from that opportunity.
And now, after a couple of summers in different organizations, I find myself where I'm at now.
So I'm an H.R. Advisor, and it's been a full circle moment for me
as some of the work I do now involves the ISEO program,
Indigenous Student Employment Opportunity, and supporting Indigenous students.
So it's right now as though I'm giving back, which feels really good to me.
But now that I'm here and I've been in this role, I've been noticing some things,
I guess, like how we know it's a pretty, horrible experience to apply to work for the public service,
especially for Indigenous Peoples.
The education and language requirements have us taking ourselves out of the running before we even start.
Actually, like I did, I never thought I could work for the government, for the public service, because I don't speak French
and I absolutely believe I know to be true, had I not attended the University of Ottawa and subsequently
the Indigenous presentation for the ISEO program, I wouldn't be here speaking to you now, at all.
And I feel a hundred and I feel 1,492% worthy and capable that I can do my job and I can do it well.
And I know other Indigenous People out there just like me, who just need this chance,
need these targeted recruitment opportunities like I have had.
So I see and am a part of many great working groups and I help support in any way I can through my position.
But I want to be very clear that I don't want to get Indigenous youth ready for the public service.
Rather, I'm working the opposite end of this with my protectiveness around youth.
That and in everything that I've seen with my career, right now, I'm aiming to get the public service ready for Indigenous youth.
Indigenous Peoples lived experience account for important learning opportunities,
just like the opportunities afforded when taking the traditional higher Western education path,
the path favored by educational requirements when staffing the public service, and that's not fair.
How are we to breathe new air into a space when that space has barred it?
On the same note, now many positions require bilingual language profiles as well.
If you look at the statistics or if you speak to any community member,
you'll understand how important language is, but rather recapturing our own that was taken.
With just those two gaps identified, I can already tell you that the work that needs to be done
to address this must also come from Indigenous Peoples.
Meaning to change the staffing of the public service so that it is inclusive and not just to Indigenous Peoples, but to everyone.
We must have representation from all equity groups at the table and clear dialog,
something I know many people right now are currently doing.
So, I stepped back, with the last sort of thing that I do want to put out there is that my path again, as I said, started with rejection.
I got, actually I got rejected in college, too, from my program,
so maybe it's just normal for me to kind of get rejected and come back.
But I think wherever your path leads you, you go, right?
I don't want to put it out there that all of this is because I went to university
and I went to school and now I'm a public servant, you don't have to do any of that.
You know, I don't believe Indigenous Peoples all should work in Indigenous Service Canada,
you know, I believe we should be everywhere.
If you're an Indigenous person and you like math, be an accountant.
You shouldn't be forced to work on Indigenous files as well.
So for me I think that I want to put it out there that all education is important
and I was again rejected and I still found my way here to this amazing place.
So any path that any schooling is so important to me.
I believe in trade schools.
I believe in language camps.
I just believe in anything that helps and heals your soul is good for you.
And so with that, I believe those experiences that you learned from those
other those other experiences will be funneled into the public service.
And through that, we will change completely change the paradigm of how we're thinking.
So, I think that was a lot that that there.
So for me I do just want to thank you for listening and that hopefully if  I can instill anything in anybody
it's that somebody like me from  growing up in Hamilton that doesn't speak French,
that they had no idea that I worked for the Government, that this is where I'm at now.
And and you can do it as well.
So, thank you so much. Niawen'kó:wa
I look forward to hopefully working with some of you in the future. Thank you.